Corporate Governance and Sustainability Committee Charter
Purpose
The Corporate Governance and Sustainability Committee is established by the Board:
• to identify individuals qualified to be Board members consistent with criteria
approved by the Board, and to recommend to the Board director nominees for
the next annual meeting of shareowners;
• to recommend to the Board directors to serve on each standing Board
Committee;
• to lead the Board in its annual review of the Board's performance;
• to develop and recommend to the Board a set of Corporate Governance
Guidelines;
• to oversee the development and implementation of succession plans for the
Chief Executive Officer and the most senior positions at the Company;
• to oversee the corporate governance affairs of the Board and the Company
consistent with the long-term best interests of the Company and its shareowners;
and
• to oversee the Company’s policies and programs and related risks to the
Company that concern certain environmental, social, legislative, regulatory,
public policy and corporate governance matters, including public issues of
significance which may, in the opinion of the Committee, affect the Company’s
business, its shareowners, the broader stakeholder community or the general
public.
Committee Membership
The Committee shall be comprised of no fewer than three members. Each member of
the Committee shall meet the independence requirements of the New York Stock
Exchange and the Company's Corporate Governance Guidelines.
The members of the Committee shall be appointed by, and may be removed by, the
Board. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum.
Committee Authority and Responsibilities
1. The Committee shall oversee preparation of and recommend to the Board the
process and protocols regarding succession plans for the Chief Executive Officer,
including plans in the event of an emergency, unexpected resignation or retirement of
the Chief Executive Officer. The Committee shall also periodically review and
recommend to the Board succession plans for the most senior positions at the
Company.
2. The Committee shall seek individuals qualified to become Board members for
recommendation to the Board, including evaluating persons suggested by shareowners
or others, and conduct the appropriate inquiries into the backgrounds and qualifications
of possible nominees. Directors should possess the highest personal and professional
ethics and integrity and be committed to representing the long-term interests of the
shareowners. The Committee shall determine each proposed nominee's qualifications
for service on the Board. The assessment will include a review of the nominee's
judgment, experience, independence, understanding of the Company's or other related
industries, and such other factors as the Committee concludes are pertinent in light of
the current needs of the Board. Each nominee should be a person of integrity and be
committed to devoting the time and attention necessary to fulfill his or her duties to the
Company. Diversity of race, ethnicity, gender and age are important factors in
evaluating candidates for Board membership.
3. The Committee shall evaluate the performance of each director before
recommending to the Board his or her nomination for an additional term as director.
4. The Committee shall have the sole authority to retain and terminate any search firm
to be used to identify director candidates and shall have sole authority to approve the
search firm's fees and other retention terms.
5. The Committee shall annually review the composition of each standing Board
Committee (including this Committee) and present recommendations for Committee
membership to the Board as needed.
6. The Committee, in collaboration with the Lead Independent Director, shall oversee
and manage the evaluation of the Board, Board Committees and management.
7. During the year, the Committee shall receive input on the Board's performance from
directors and, through the Committee’s Chairman or the Lead Independent Director, will
discuss the input with the full Board and oversee the full Board's review of its
performance.
8. The Committee shall periodically review and reassess the adequacy of the
Company’s corporate governance framework, including its Certificate of Incorporation,
By-Laws and Corporate Governance Guidelines, and recommend any proposed
changes to the Board for approval.
9. The Committee shall review and approve all related person transactions in
accordance with the Company’s Related Person Transactions Policy.
10. The Committee shall recommend and review all matters pertaining to fees and
retainers paid to directors for Board and Committee service and for serving as
Chairman of a Board Committee, and shall have sole authority to employ consultants or
advisors to evaluate director compensation and to approve consulting fees and other
retention terms. In determining compensation, the Committee shall take into
consideration the responsibilities of the directors and fees and other forms of
compensation being paid by other corporations comparable to the Company.
11. The Committee will review the Company’s sustainability programs and goals and
the Company’s progress toward achieving those goals, particularly in the Company’s
key sustainability focus areas.
12. The Committee will review the Company’s human rights practices, including those
practices within the Company’s business system and supply chain.
13. The Committee will have oversight for the Company’s public policy agenda and will
periodically review significant public policy matters.
14. Through the Company’s shareowner engagement program, the Committee will
monitor investor sentiment related to sustainability and corporate governance matters.
15. The Committee shall review shareowner proposals submitted to the Company.
16. The Committee shall review political and charitable contributions made by the
Company.
17. The Committee shall have authority to retain such outside counsel, experts and
other advisors, as the Committee may deem appropriate in its sole discretion and shall
have the sole authority to approve related fees and other retention terms. The
Committee shall be provided with appropriate funding, as determined by the Committee,
for payment of compensation to such outside counsel, accountants, experts and other
advisors.
18. The Committee shall make regular reports to the Board.
19. The Committee may form and delegate authority to subcommittees when
appropriate.
20. The Committee shall periodically review and reassess the adequacy of this Charter
and recommend any proposed changes to the Board for approval.
21. The Committee shall annually review its own performance.
Last updated: October 17, 2024